one of the biggest shadows hanging over
modern Buddhism in every form Mayan
antara vada is the idea that what is
more ancient is more rational and this
is something that you may have seen
discussed directly in academic articles
but even if you haven't seen it really
address straight on it's really kind of
lurking in the background of a lot of
what gets set up with the history of
Buddhism and when people are trying to
establish what is and what isn't a
legitimate or definitive part of
Buddhist philosophy um anyone who states
is that clearly it's already like a bad
joke you already taught you about
something that's just so ridiculous you
can't really believe anyone would take
it seriously if we're talking about
history in ancient Greece does anyone
start with the assumption that whatever
is more ancient it is more rational is
more pure is more definitive no ancient
Greece if you're going to really get
serious for Greek philosophy you're
gonna find totally crazy superstitious
magical beliefs in every error of that
history and if anything I think people
would feel that when you go back to the
earlier period things get a little bit
worse you never heard anyone talk about
each and Egypt or even ancient China
with that sense that whatever is more
ancient it's going to be more rational
but this is a huge preconception that's
foisted on Buddhism it's been talked
about in a couple of my articles
obviously this is going to be a much
more shortened straightforward answer
the question what is the association
between rationality and earlier level of
the text
well okay to play devil's advocate for
half a second year in the 19th century
when Europeans were colonizing Asia had
a much more rapid rate than ever before
although they already had many centuries
of colonialism behind them and when
publishing in Europe had really opened
up to presenting a lot of things that
before would have been censored or just
would have never gotten published the
Buddhism that they encountered in the
field was obviously very much involved
in ritual and very much mixed up with
Hindu ideas ideas that weren't uniquely
Buddhist ideas that stemmed from local
religious traditions so you know to play
devil's advocate from the colonial
perspective in the 19th century you
start off with the prejudice that makes
sense but is just an irrational
prejudice okay
there's look the normal peasants do and
then there's a written canon of texts
and the written Canon obviously coming
from a Christian perspective there was
an assumption that the written Canon
will contain the definitive philosophy
of the religion in contrast to the very
diverse rituals that they would have
encountered in places from Tibet to Sri
Lanka and you know I mean Buddhism in
the 19th century in Tibet included human
sacrifice if Europeans are asking this
question well is human sacrifice really
a legitimate part of Buddhism is
meat-eating illegitimate Buddhism is
having a secret cows illegitimate part
of autism or is that Hindu influenced
those kinds of questions that are first
digging into it obviously they had to
look around to try to establish what
were the ancient texts those texts
became available to European
remarkably late if you look at a
philosopher like Arthur Schopenhauer who
was very influential over the Europeans
became the first real scholars and
Buddhism
Schopenhauer had access to almost
nothing he had a few little bits and
pieces that managed to make it over from
the study and put some in China Japan
and that's one of the story friction for
discussion but 1874 is when one of the
first big chunks of politics gets
presented to Europe and that's the
description of the death of the Buddha
we call the mahaparinirvana system now
part of an Isetta is published in 1874
not in English just in Pali and I mean
1874 it tastes health like ancient
history but think about the history of
philosophy in Europe generally I mean
it's remarkably late in the game that
becomes available and the guy who did
the hard work of making that available
was a guy named our seat shoulders and
shoulders if anyone knows that Neiman's
because he wrote a dictionary for pally
a very imperfect dictionary was the
first dictionary that that made it
easier a lot easier to do this kind of
work and I came up the next year in 1875
ok so that's a big turning point in the
life of the first big famous name in the
history of Tarragona put of studies
who's still one of the most influential
authors in Buddhism and that is mr. Rees
Davis I've written several essays that
attack and criticize Ruiz Davis and
there's a lot wrong with his work
there's a lot that's worth criticizing
the wealth is still worth debating and
discussing today but starting from
Childers work he translated the
Mahabharata - it's a into English and
then he brings out the first real volume
length work I mean mouth our new bonus
is a the description of the foot is
death it's like a short novel or a long
short story in length but what ruiz
david's brings out is the first volume
of the Deegan Akaya so that is a
book-length
collection of texts and that's
and that's influential not just in the
beat of the translation look from the
date of the first publication of the of
the polity and that's 1889 now again
1889 it's all that long ago thinking
about it flex you won't feel a soft
force possible
what is them that just hasn't been that
that much time not that many scholars
not that many influential authors in the
game if you actually go to an archive
and get a first edition of the 1889 and
Deegan Akaya although it is it's
empowering it's in a language very few
people can read what he did was he
translated a one sentence summary in
English for each page and that made it a
lot more accessible people who had a
little bit of a background and some
other in the language whether it was
Sanskrit or modern any language above
Marathi of Marathi crack right there
were enough people around who could
muddle through that text especially in
the way it was presented because it was
really made easier by having a one
sentence summary for each page to let
you find what you were looking for give
you an idea what was going on and then
you could sit down and and then deal
with the themes of text and anyway
English translations came out in the
decades after of the full text so that
opened the door on to tera vaada
Buddhism in a sense of canonical and
you know hold on court authentic
Buddhism for Europeans that was easy to
get it it was on a bookshelf it was a
pill and put with the cover it wasn't a
trunk full of handwritten palm leaf
manuscripts in a language nobody could
understand okay so coming back to the
fundamental question I'm asking here why
would people regard what is more ancient
as more authentic well I mentioned the
kind of colonial background of what
people saw in the village and at the
temple in terms of ritual and
superstitious beliefs and then we have
these two landmark text coming out
Mahabharata bonuses oh there's one sort
of describing the death of the Buddha
and the events leading up
but it lends itself to this kind of
perspective the nature of the text is
heavily laden with supersuit with
supernatural imagery magical things
happen throughout the text and for
people from a Christian background they
say okay this looks like a text that's
been sort of corrupted and embellished
and it's had legend added to it and on
the other hand you can see human aspects
of it shining through oh come back to a
little bit of a why that is I think I'm
second put him who you to begin to study
with that's a lot to say about it still
today um but the contrast was between
the narratives of the Buddha's death the
next big thing mark is Deacon cut Deacon
the gaya only one verse 20 back well
guess what you know the Deacon Akaya
which is a major collection of Buddhist
philosophical texts including also some
not so philosophical texts but stories
that war on the push tradition it's not
arranged in random order it is actually
arranged fanatically and the first
volume of the DNA kya as it happens is
about morality so it doesn't open with
it nearly as much supernatural material
it doesn't open with material of
cosmology ancient Buddhists just like
ancient Greeks had a complex and very
magical view of what the world was you
know there's a mathematical mountain at
the centre of the world in that ancient
Indian cosmology that's in many ways
like Mount Olympus there are wars
between gods and demons there are ghosts
there's heaven and hell it's a very you
know this is mythology and the whole
palette cannon is heavily laden with
ethology but as it happens what was the
first part of the Canon that really
opened the door for your
teams to to look at this material and in
contrast to the narrative of the
Buddha's death
the answer is happen to be the first one
with Deegan attire now it's cut me short
I'm only talking about a couple of
historical figures people were really
inspired by this and this reinforced the
tenants who think okay there's there's a
more rational less supernatural original
core to these texts it's it's not true
in case you're fighting the force at one
year this is really a misconception that
Europeans brought to bear but an example
person who was really inspired by the
publishing of the Deegan Akaya
was the woman who became mr. V Stephens
wife so I normally call her mrs. Ruiz
Davis - what confusion her name is given
in CAF Wiis david's she really got very
inspired by her husband's work and you
can read her sense of disappointment
with almost every Buddhist texts she
calendars in her career because she was
comparing to the expectation she had
that were based you know on the two
types of already mentioned she worked
for very long time on a be Dhamma texts
I'm not gonna spend what that is it's a
different section of Canon and you can
read both in her articles and in her
introduction to post her sense of a
total disappointment in dismay you know
she was expecting to find a kind of
perfect rational philosophy when she dug
into these ancient texts and then she's
horrified when she finds even the son
gets a nakiya
so the the nakaya's are major sections
of text even when she was working on
that you have this sense of dismay comer
including in the introductions to her to
her books there were volumes on that
subject so a whole generation of people
had a set of expectations that they
probably brought to Buddhism anyway just
a sheer of prejudice
confirmed about what happened
be the the leading scholarship of the
time just in the years leading right up
to 20th century this is at the ragged
end of the 19th century
what's my date for first first
translation of Deegan Akaya the whole
thing in English is 1899 so the call at
19th century 19th century was running at
a time um there's a lot more I could say
about this and a lot of its discussed in
you know longer view in my essay the
opposite of Buddhism that goes back
several centuries and then focuses on
more ethical issues and some of these
issues are discussed from a more
practical perspective in another very
long essay called Canon and reason that
is coming up both in Chinese in English
the second Chinese translation is
supposed to be done next week but what's
the cultural background really briefly
why is it the europeans have come to
this with these expectations
um you know when you look at certain
flash points in the history of
christianity of 19th century i think
that one of the major cultural trends of
that century that's now forgotten
because it's not as controversial
anymore it's not as emotive was the
passion to try to reread the bible and
to establish a sense of the historical
Jesus in Christianity now yeah if you
search within YouTube right now you can
see people were so passionate about
those issues to some extent controversy
is still going on you know Thomas
Jefferson wrote his version of the Bible
in 1819 that's what's called the
Jefferson Bible Oh what do you mean so
my net what do you mean he wrote his own
Bible well it's pretty much literally
that he actually took a knife and
scissors and cut up the Bible and he
literally cut out the parts he didn't
like and sold together the parts he did
like and he produced a version of the
Bible that removed
all the supernatural material now Thomas
Jefferson was wealthy and powerful
enough that he could get away with this
he was not going to be censored he's not
going to be tortured by any kind of
church authority and the 19th century
the nature of censorship was changing
just a few centuries before people in
Europe when you'd have to really be
afraid for your life to do some of this
and even within the u.s. the whole
history of the witch trials and what
have you and many of the outstanding
atheists and freethinkers you know in
Europe's history that we have any
evidence for were also aristocrats of
powerful people politically who could
get away with asking the questions that
has thinking of a pair of figures pulled
off that held ETS they were one of the
most influential pamphlets on atheism in
the years leading up to the revolution
in France the first French Revolution
had a few since then much twist
you know this tendency of wanting to
find something more rational but looking
within the Bible among many people who
didn't really want to make the leap to
over atheism but he wanted to kind of
maintain a connection with Christianity
is a religion while basically rejecting
the notion that Jesus came back in the
day that was a tremendous cultural
movement and it found a kind of lit fuse
in the controversy over the ending of
the Gospel of Mark that controversy was
known for from more than fighters who's
basically known from from early medieval
times but the ending of mark mark
chapter 16 in the 18th century in the
19th century it became a little more
possible for people to discuss and chat
about the fact that there really was
evidence that the ending of that
particular book of the Bible originally
did not include the resurrection of
Jesus
that Jesus dies and he's put in a tomb
and that's it he Steve's dead he doesn't
he doesn't come back from the dead
now that sort of factoid in isolation
who was just the kind of footnote in the
history of Christianity it wouldn't be a
big deal but a lot of people today
underestimate how many people many
centuries didn't want to reject
Christianity entirely but wanted a less
narrow religion that they could continue
to be a part of so the short answer is
in the 19th century tremendous cultural
impetus to find the historical Buddha
and the assumption that the historical
Buddha is more rational than any other
but the people won't think about that
doesn't just have a parallel in what was
going on with the the historical Jesus
it's an intersection they really are the
same kind of quest and that's one of the
reasons why this was so influential
within Asia this is by no means an
exclusively European phenomenon as soon
as European scholars aged installed
scholars were working together which is
really the whole history of European
scholarship they relied a great deal in
cooperation for local local amongst
local translators and specialists you
know for the same reasons why many
Christians didn't want to just become
atheist or maybe put us who didn't want
to reject what isn't entirely but it was
tremendously appealing for them to
imagine that there was a non mystical
non-supernatural historical Buddha to be
discovered inside the pages though the
most ancient sutras in the Pali Canada
okay I think I've said a lot for one
YouTube video human attention span is
what it is you know in case I haven't
ceded it explicitly enough the problem
with this thesis is that it's just not
true and in what sense is not true if
you told me that the real Plato or the
real Socrates or the real Herodotus
three different
in Greece he told me that the real
original Colossians people continue no
superstition nothing magical I would say
I can imagine emotional reasons why some
people don't believe that you might want
to think that the greatest philosophies
of ancient Greece or that if you dig
into pre-socratic philosophy that there
will be a theistic rationalistic or
scientific in their outlook but we know
anyone who wants to do the reading - no
that's not true you know and one of the
things that makes ancient Greek
philosophy exciting is the tension that
exists between skeptical sources and
sources that that really embrace not
just superstition but a magical view of
the world that reflects all the fears
and ignorance and hallucinations that
people had you know in a much more
primitive and desperate time I think you
know to try to end with see positive -
that's a bit because that's an end note
you know if if you if you don't respect
that when you're reading ancient texts
if you feel compelled to censor hell and
ghosts and demons so to cut them out of
the Bible the same way Thomas Jefferson
did then you should not be a scholar of
any ancient religion you should work on
ancient Greece you shouldn't or come up
and put a soup or anything else
and if you have the attitude a basically
a sympathetic attitude that these books
were written by human beings and reflect
their culture and their attitudes at
that time then you can be a stolen it's
not even that hard to make exciting and
original discoveries working these texts
because so few people that work with
them and as I mentioned in a lot of ways
that's opened up to Western involvement
nation's involvement
a little more than 100 years okay